The Project Gutenberg eBook of Chambers's Journal of Popular
Literature, Science, and Art, fifth series, no. 123, vol. III, May 8,
1886, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Chambers's Journal of Popular Literature, Science, and Art, fifth
       series, no. 123, vol. III, May 8, 1886

Author: Various

Release Date: March 26, 2023 [eBook #70386]

Language: English

Produced by: Susan Skinner, Eric Hutton and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The
             Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHAMBERS'S JOURNAL OF POPULAR
LITERATURE, SCIENCE, AND ART, FIFTH SERIES, NO. 123, VOL. III, MAY 8,
1886 ***





[Illustration:

CHAMBERS’S JOURNAL

OF

POPULAR

LITERATURE, SCIENCE, AND ART

Fifth Series

ESTABLISHED BY WILLIAM AND ROBERT CHAMBERS, 1832

CONDUCTED BY R. CHAMBERS (SECUNDUS)

NO. 123.—VOL. III.      SATURDAY, MAY 8, 1886.     PRICE 1½_d._]




COTTAGE IDEAS.

BY RICHARD JEFFERIES.


Passing by the kitchen-door, I heard Louisa, the maid, chanting to a
child on her knee:

    Feyther stole th’ Paason’s sheep;
    A merry Christmas we shall keep;
    We shall have both mutton and beef—
    _But we won’t say nothing about it_.

To rightly understand this rhyme, you must sing it with long-drawn
emphasis on each word, lengthening it into at least two syllables; the
first a sort of hexameter, the second a pentameter of sound:

    Fey-ther sto-ole th’ Paa-son’s sheep.

The last line is to come off more trippingly, like an ‘aside.’ This
old sing-song had doubtless been handed down from the times when the
labourers really did steal sheep, a crime happily extinct with cheap
bread. Louisa was one of the rare old sort—hard-working, and always
ready; never complaining, but satisfied with any food there chanced
to be; sensible and sturdy; a woman who could be thoroughly depended
on. Her boxes were full of good dresses, of a solid, unassuming kind,
such as would wear well—a perfect wardrobe. Her purse was always well
supplied with money; she had money saved up, and she sent money to her
parents: yet her wages, until late years, had been small. In doing her
duty to others, she did good to herself. A duchess would have been glad
to have her in her household. She had been in farmhouse service from
girlhood, and had doubtless learned much from good housewives; farmers’
wives are the best of all teachers; and the girls, for their own sakes,
had much better be under them than wasting so much time learning
useless knowledge at compulsory schools.

    Freckles said, when he came in,
    He never would enter a tawny skin,

was another of her rhymes. Freckles come in with summer, but never
appear on a dark skin, so that the freckled should rejoice in these
signs of fairness.

    Your father, the elderberry,
    Was not such a gooseberry
    As to send in his bilberry
    Before it was dewberry.

Some children are liable to an unpleasant complaint at night; for this,
there is a certain remedy. A mouse is baked in the oven to a ‘scrump,’
then pounded to powder, and this powder administered. Many ladies still
have faith in this curious medicine; it reminds one of the powdered
mummy, once the great cure of human ills. Country-places have not
always got romantic names—Wapse’s Farm, for instance, and Hog’s Pudding
Farm. Wapse is the provincial for wasp.

Country girls are not all so shrewd as Louisa; we heard of two—this was
some time since—who, being in service in London, paid ten shillings
each to Madame Rachel for a bath to be made beautiful for ever. Half a
sovereign out of their few coins! On the other hand, town servants are
well dressed and have plenty of finery, but seldom have any reserve
of good clothing, such as Louisa possessed. All who know the country,
regret the change that has been gradually coming over the servants and
the class from which they are supplied. ‘Gawd help the pore missis as
gets hold of _you_!’ exclaimed a cottage-woman to her daughter, whose
goings-on had not been as they should be: ‘God help the poor mistress
who has to put up with you!’ A remark that would be most emphatically
echoed by many a farmer’s wife and country resident. ‘Doan’t you stop,
if her hollers at ’ee,’ said another cottage-mother to her girl, just
departing for service—that is, don’t stop if you don’t like it; don’t
stop if your mistress finds the least fault. ‘Come along home, if you
don’t like it.’ Home to what? In this instance, it was a most wretched
hovel, literally built in a ditch; no convenience, no sanitation; and
the father a drunkard, who scarcely brought enough money indoors to
supply bread.

You would imagine that a mother in such a position would impress upon
her children the necessity of endeavouring to do something. For the
sake of that spirit of independence in which they seem to take so much
pride, one would suppose they would desire to see their children able
to support themselves. But it is just the reverse; the poorer folk are,
the less they seem to care to try to do something. ‘You come home if
you don’t like it;’ and stay about the hovel in slatternly idleness,
tails bedraggled and torn, thin boots out at the toes and down at
the heels, half-starved on potatoes and weak tea—stay till you fall
into disgrace, and lose the only thing you possess in the world—your
birthright—your character. Strange advice it was for a mother to give.

Nor is the feeling confined to the slatternly section, but often
exhibited by very respectable cottagers indeed.

‘My mother never would go out to service—she _wouldn’t_ go,’ said a
servant to her mistress, one day talking confidentially.

‘Then what did she do?’ asked the mistress, knowing they were very poor
people.

‘Oh, she stopped at home.’

‘But how did she live?’

‘Oh, her father had to keep her. If she wouldn’t go out, of course he
had to somehow.’

This mother would not let her daughter go to one place because there
was a draw-well on the premises; and her father objected to her
going to another because the way to the house lay down a long and
lonely lane. The girl herself, however, had sense enough to keep in
a situation; but it was distinctly against the feeling at her home;
yet they were almost the poorest family in the place. They were very
respectable, and thought well of in every way, belonging to the best
class of cottagers.

Unprofitable sentiments! injurious sentiments—self-destroying; but I
always maintain that sentiment is stronger than fact, and even than
self-interest. I see clearly how foolish these feelings are, and how
they operate to the disadvantage of those whom they influence. Yet I
confess that were I in the same position, I should be just as foolish.
If I lived in a cottage of three rooms, and earned my bread by dint
of arm and hand under the sun of summer and the frost of winter; if I
lived on hard fare, and, most powerful of all, if I had no hope for the
future, no improvement to look forward to, I should feel just the same.
I would rather my children shared my crust, than fed on roast-beef
in a stranger’s hall. Perhaps the sentiment in my case might have a
different origin, but in effect it would be similar. I should prefer to
see my family about me—the one only pleasure I should have—the poorer
and the more unhappy, the less I should care to part with them. This
may be foolish, but I expect it is human nature.

English folk don’t ‘cotton’ to their poverty at all; they don’t eat
humble-pie with a relish; they resent being poor and despised. Foreign
folk seem to take to it quite naturally; an Englishman, somehow or
other, always feels that he is wronged. He is injured; he has not
got his rights. To me, it seems the most curious thing possible
that well-to-do people should expect the poor to be delighted with
their condition. I hope they never will be—an evil day that—if it
ever came—for the Anglo-Saxon race. There always seemed to me to be
something peculiarly repulsive in the doctrine of the old Catechism,
once so studiously worked into the minds of the villagers by dint of
constant repetition, teaching them to be satisfied ‘To do their duty
in the station to which it had pleased God to call them’—that is, to
hedge and ditch and wash greasy plates all their lives, according
as they were male or female, handmaids or man-jacks. To touch hats
and forelocks, to bob courtesies (not out of courtesy as equals, but
in sign of low degree). To be lowly of spirit before clay clad in
broadcloth—a species of idolatry—to beat down and destroy those inward
feelings of independence natural to all. Anything more opposed to that
onward movement in which the hopes of the human race are bound up, it
would be impossible to conceive.

One girl prided herself very much upon belonging to a sort of club
or insurance—if she died, her mother would receive ten pounds. Ten
pounds, ten golden sovereigns, was to her such a magnificent sum, that
she really appeared to wish herself dead, in order that it might be
received. She harped and talked and brooded on it constantly. If she
caught cold, it didn’t matter, she would say, her mother would have ten
pounds. It seemed a curious reversal of ideas, but it is a fact that
poor folk in course of time come to think less of death than money.
Another girl was describing to her mistress how she met the carter’s
ghost in the rickyard; the wagon-wheel went over him; but he continued
to haunt the old scene, and they met him as commonly as the sparrows.

‘Did you ever speak to him?’

‘Oh no. You mustn’t speak to them; if you speak to them, they’ll fly at
you.’

In winter, the men were allowed to grub up the roots of timber that
had been thrown, and take the wood home for their own use; this kept
them in fuel the winter through without buying any. ‘But they don’t get
_paid_ for that work.’ She considered it quite a hardship that they
were not paid for taking a present. Cottage people do look at things in
such a curious crooked light! A mother grumbled because the vicar had
not been to see her child, who was ill. Now, she was not a church-goer,
and cared nothing for the Church or its doctrines—that was not it—she
grumbled so terribly because ‘it was his place to come.’

A lady went to live in a village for health’s sake, and having heard
so much of the poverty of the farmer’s man, and how badly his family
were off, thought that she should find plenty who would be glad to
pick up extra shillings by doing little things for her. First, she
wanted a stout boy to help to draw her Bath-chair, while the footman
pushed behind, it being a hilly country. Instead of having to choose
between half-a-dozen applicants, as she expected, the difficulty was
to discover anybody who would even take such a job into consideration.
The lads did not care about it; their fathers did not care about it;
and their mothers did not want them to do it. At one cottage there were
three lads at home doing nothing; but the mother thought they were too
delicate for such work. In the end, a boy was found, but not for some
time. Nobody was eager for any extra shilling to be earned in that way.
The next thing was somebody to fetch a yoke or two of spring-water
daily. This man did not care for it, and the other did not care for
it; and even one who had a small piece of ground and kept a donkey and
water-butt on wheels for the very purpose, shook his head. He always
fetched water for folk in the summer when it was dry, never fetched
none at that time of year—he could not do it. After a time, a small
shopkeeper managed the yoke of water from the spring for her—_his_ boy
could carry it; the labourers could not. He was comparatively well to
do, yet he was not above an extra shilling.

This is one of the most curious traits in the character of cottage
folk—they do not care for small sums; they do not care to pick up
sixpences. They seem to be _afraid of obliging people_—as if to do so,
even to their own advantage, would be against their personal honour and
dignity. In London, the least trifle is snapped up immediately, and
there is a great crush and press for permission to earn a penny, and
that not in very dignified ways. In the country, it is quite different.
Large fortunes have been made out of matches; now your true country
cottager would despise such a miserable fraction of a penny as is
represented by a match. I heard a little girl singing—

    Little drops of water, little grains of sand.

It is these that make oceans and mountains; it is pennies that make
millionaires. But this the country-man cannot see. Not him alone
either; the dislike to little profits is a national characteristic,
well marked in the farmer, and indeed in all classes. I, too, must
be humble, and acknowledge that I have frequently detected the same
folly in myself, so let it not be supposed for an instant that I set
up as a censor; I do but delineate. Work for the cottager must be
work to please him; and to please him, it must be the regular sort to
which he is accustomed, which he did beside his father as a boy, which
_his_ father did, and _his_ father before him; the same old plough or
grub-axe, the same milking, the same identical mowing, if possible in
the same field. He does not care for any newfangled jobs: he does not
recognise them, they have no _locus standi_—they are not established.
Yet he is most anxious for work, and works well, and is indeed the best
labourer in the world. But it is the national character. To understand
a nation, you must go to the cottager.

The well-to-do are educated, they have travelled, if not in their
ideas they are more or less cosmopolitan. In the cottager, the
character stands out in the coarsest relief; in the cottager, you
get to ‘bed-rock,’ as the Americans say; there’s the foundation.
Character runs upwards, not downwards. It is not the nature of the
aristocrat that permeates the cottager, but the nature of the cottager
that permeates the aristocrat. The best of us are polished cottagers.
Scratch deep enough, and you come to that; so that to know a people,
go to the cottage, and not to the mansion. The labouring man cannot
quickly alter his ways. Can the manufacturer? All alike try to go in
the same old groove, till disaster visits their persistence. It is
English human nature.




IN ALL SHADES.


CHAPTER XXV.

They had reached the top of the stone steps, when two voices were borne
upon them from the two ends of the corridor opposite. The first was
Mr Dupuy’s. ‘Where is she?’ it said.—‘Mrs Pereira, where’s Nora? You
don’t mean to say this is true that Tom tells me—that you’ve actually
gone and let her sit out a dance with that conceited nigger fellow, Dr
Whitaker? Upon my word, my dear madam, what this island is coming to
nowadays is really more than I can imagine.’

The second voice was a louder and blander one. ‘My son, my son,’ it
said, in somewhat thick accents, ‘my dear son, Wilberforce Clarkson
Whitaker! Where is he? Is he in de garden? I want to introduce
him to de governor’s lady. De governor’s lady has been graciously
pleased to express an interes in de inheritor of de tree names most
closely bound up wit de great social revolution, in which I have had
de honour to be de chief actor, for de benefit of millions of my
fellow-subjecks.—Walkin’ in de garden, is he, wit de daughter of my
respected friend, de Honourable Teodore Dupuy of Orange Garden? Ha, ha!
Dat’s de way wit de young dogs—dat’s de way wit dem! Always off walkin’
in de garden wit de pretty ladies. Ha, ha, ha! I doan’t blame dem!’

Dr Whitaker, his face on fire and his ears tingling, pushed on rapidly
down the very centre of the garden, taking no heed of either voice in
outward seeming, but going straight on, with Nora on his arm, till he
reached the open window-doors that led directly into the big ballroom.
There, seething in soul, but outwardly calm and polite, he handed over
his partner with a conventional smile to Captain Castello, and turning
on his heel, strode away bitterly across the ballroom to the outer
doorway. Not a few people noticed him as he strode off in his angry
dignity, for Tom Dupuy had already been blustering—with his usual
taste—in the corridors and refreshment room about his valiant threat
of soundly horsewhipping the woolly-headed mulatto. In the vestibule,
the doctor paused and asked for his dust-coat. A negro servant, in
red livery, grinning with delight at what he thought the brown man’s
discomfiture, held it up for him to put his arms into. Dr Whitaker
noticed the fellow’s malevolent grin, and making an ineffectual effort
to push his left arm down the right arm sleeve, seized the coat angrily
in his hand, doubled it up in a loose fold over his elbow, and then,
changing his mind, as an angry man will do, flung it down again with
a hasty gesture upon the hall table. ‘Never mind the coat,’ he said
fiercely. ‘Bring round my horse! Do you hear, fellow? My horse, my
horse! This minute, I tell you!’

The red-liveried servant called to an invisible negro outside, who soon
returned with the doctor’s mountain pony.

‘Better take de coat, sah,’ the man in livery said with a sarcastic
guffaw. ‘Him help to proteck your back an’ sides from Mistah Dupuy, him
horsewhip!’

Dr Whitaker leapt upon his horse, and turned to the man with a face
livid and distorted with irrepressible anger. ‘You black scoundrel,
you!’ he cried passionately, using the words of reproach that even a
mulatto will hurl in his wrath at his still darker brother, ‘do you
think I’m running away from Tom Dupuy’s miserable horsewhip? I’m not
afraid of a hundred fighting Dupuys and all their horsewhips.—You
black image, you! how dare you speak to me? How dare you?—how dare
you?’ And he cut out at him viciously in impotent rage with the little
riding-whip he held in his fingers.

The negro laughed again, a loud hoarse laugh, and flung both his
hands up with open fingers in African derision. Dr Whitaker dug his
spurless heel deep into his horse’s side, sitting there wildly in his
evening dress, and turned his head in mad despair out towards the outer
darkness. The moon was still shining brightly overhead, but by contrast
with the lights in the gaily illuminated ballroom, the path beneath the
bamboo clumps in the shrubbery looked very gloomy, dark, and sombre.

Two or three of the younger men, anxious to see whether Tom Dupuy
would get up ‘a scene’ then and there, crowded out hastily to the
doorway, to watch the nigger fellow ride away for his life for fear
of a horsewhipping. As they stood in the doorway, peering into the
darkness after the retreating upright figure, there came all at once,
with appalling suddenness, a solitary vivid flash of lightning, such
as one never sees outside the tropics, illuminating with its awful
light the whole length of the gardens and the gully beneath them. At
the same second, a terrific clap of thunder seemed to burst, like
innumerable volleys of the heaviest artillery, right above the roof of
the governor’s bungalow. It was ghastly in its suddenness and in its
strength. No one could say where the lightning struck, for it seemed to
have struck on every side at once: all that they saw was a single sheet
of all-pervading fire, in whose midst the mulatto and his horse stood
silhouetted out in solid black, a statuesque group of living sculpture,
against the brilliant fiery background. The horse was rearing, erect
on his hind-legs; and Dr Whitaker was reining him in and patting
his neck soothingly with hand half lifted. So instantaneous was the
flash, indeed, that no motion or change of any sort was visible in the
figures. The horse looked like a horse of bronze, poised in the air on
solid metal legs, and merely simulating the action of rearing.

For a minute or two, not a soul spoke a word, or broke in any way
the deathless silence that succeeded that awful and unexpected
outburst. The band had ceased playing as if by instinct, and every
person in the whole ballroom stood still and looked one at another
with mute amazement. Then, by a common impulse, they pressed all out
slowly together, and gazed forth with wondering eyes upon the serene
moonlight. The stars were shining brightly overhead: the clap had
broken from an absolutely clear sky. Only to northward, on the very
summits of the highest mountains, a gathering of deep black clouds
rolled slowly onward, and threatened to pass across the intervening
valley. Through the profound silence, the ring of Dr Whitaker’s horse’s
hoofs could be heard distinctly down below upon the solid floor of the
mountain pathway.

‘Who has left already?’ the governor asked anxiously of the negro
servants.

‘Dr Whitaker, your Excellency, sah,’ the man in red livery answered,
grinning respectfully.

‘Call him back!’ the governor said in a tone of command. ‘There’s an
awful thunderstorm coming. No man will ever get down alive to the
bottom of the valley until it’s over.’

‘It doan’t no use, sah,’ the negro answered. ‘His horse’s canterin’
down de hillside de same as if him starin’ mad, sah!’ And as he spoke,
Dr Whitaker’s white shirt-front gleamed for a second in the moonlight
far below, at a turn of the path beside the threatening gully.

Almost before any one could start to recall him, the rain and thunder
were upon them with tropical violence. The clouds had drifted rapidly
across the sky; the light of the moon was completely effaced; black
darkness reigned over the mountains; not a star, not a tree, not
an object of any sort could now be discerned through the pitchy
atmosphere. Rain! it was hardly rain, but rather a continuous torrent
outpoured as from some vast aërial fountain. Every minute or two, a
terrific flash lighted up momentarily the gloomy darkness; and almost
simultaneously, loud peals of thunder bellowed and re-echoed from
peak to peak. The dance was interrupted for the time at least, and
everybody crowded out silently to the veranda and the corridors, where
the lightning and the rain could be more easily seen, mingling with the
thunder in one hideous din, and forming torrents that rushed down the
dry gullies in roaring cataracts to the plains below.

And Dr Whitaker? On he rode, the lightning terrifying his little
mountain pony at every flash, the rain beating down upon him
mercilessly with equatorial fierceness, the darkness stretching in
front of him and below him, save when, every now and then, the awful
forks of flame illumined for a second the gulfs and precipices that
yawned beneath in profoundest gloom. Yet still he rode on, erect and
heedless, his hat now lost, bareheaded to the pitiless storm, cold
without, and fiery hot at heart within. He cared for nothing now—for
nothing—for nothing. Nora had put the final coping-stone on that grim
growth of black despair within his soul, that palace of nethermost
darkness which alone he was henceforth to inhabit. Nay, in the heat and
bitterness of the moment, had he not even sealed his own doom? Had he
not sunk down actually to the level of those who despised and contemned
him? Had he not been guilty of contemptuous insolence to his own
colour, in the words he had flung so wildly at the head of the negro in
livery? What did it matter now whatever happened to him? All, all was
lost; and he rode on recklessly, madly, despairingly, down that wild
and precipitous mountain pathway, he knew not and he cared not whither.

It was a narrow track, a mere thread of bridle-path, dangerous enough
even in the best of seasons, hung half-way up the steep hillside, with
the peak rising sheer above on one hand, and the precipice yawning
black beneath on the other. Stones and creepers cumbered the ground;
pebbles and earth, washed down at once by the violence of the storm,
blocked and obliterated the track in many places; here, a headlong
torrent tore across it with resistless vehemence; there, a little chasm
marked the spot where a small landslip had rendered it impassable. The
horse floundered and reared and backed up again and again in startled
terror; Dr Whitaker, too reckless at last even to pat and encourage
him, let him go whatever way his fancy led him among the deep brake of
cactuses and tree ferns. And still the rain descended in vast sheets
and flakes of water, and still the lightning flashed and quivered among
the ravines and gullies of those torn and crumpled mountain-sides.
The mulatto took no notice any longer; he only sang aloud in a wild,
defiant, half-crazy voice the groaning notes of his own terrible
Hurricane Symphony.

So they went, on and down, on and down, on and down always, through
fire and water, the horse plunging and kicking and backing; the rider
flinging his arms carelessly around him, till they reached the bend
in the road beside Louis Delgado’s mud cottage. The old African was
sitting cross-legged by himself at the door of his hut, watching
the rain grimly by the intermittent light of the frequent flashes.
Suddenly, a vivider flash than any burst in upon him with a fearful
clap; and by its light, he saw a great gap in the midst of the path,
twenty yards wide, close by the cottage; and at its upper end, a horse
and rider, trembling on the very brink of the freshly cut abyss. Next
instant, the flash was gone, and when the next came, Louis Delgado saw
nothing but the gap itself and the wild torrent that had so instantly
cut it. The old man smiled an awful smile of gratified malevolence.
‘Ha, ha!’ he said to himself aloud, hugging his withered old breast
in malicious joy; ‘I guess dat buckra lyin’ dead by now, down, down,
down, at de bottom ob de gully. Ha, ha; ha, ha, ha; him lyin’ dead at
de bottom ob de gully; an’ it one buckra de less left alive to bodder
us here in de island ob Trinidad.’ He had not seen the mulatto’s face;
but he took him at once to be a white man because, in spite of rain and
spattered mud, his white shirt-front still showed out distinctly in the
red glare of the vivid lightning.




UNPOPULAR RELATIONSHIPS.


Historians for the most part recount only the great events of the
world; though, by brief anecdotes and familiar illustrations, they
sometimes glance at the manners and morals of a particular period.
But, in reality, human happiness depends far more on harmonious social
relations than on changes of dynasties or the aggrandisement of
empires; and a philosophical consideration of the weaknesses of human
nature in connection with home-life may be as profitable to us as
poring over a description of those striking events which apparently led
to the rise and fall of nations. We say apparently, for the causes of
most things which happen are a good deal more remote than we may fancy
them.

We see how individual characters and interests and public events
act and react on one another; but our reason is very apt to play at
cross-purposes and mistake cause for effect. One thing, however, is
certain, that the family life of a nation is the greatest of all
factors in its ill or well being. A happy well-ordered home is, as a
rule, the nest in which wise men and good women are most likely to be
reared. Yet the ideal patriarchal life is not certain to be realised,
even by those most fitted to lead it. The happiest of married couples
do not always live to see their children grown up, much less to
behold their children’s children to the third and fourth generation.
Undoubtedly, the loss of a wise and loving mother is one of the
greatest misfortunes which can befall a family. This truth is in all
its bearings so much a truism that it is needless to dilate on it.
What we are about to consider is the prejudice which so often prevails
against Step-mothers.

Let us picture to ourselves a middle-class household, with perhaps four
or five children of tender age, suddenly deprived of a mother’s care.
Happy is it in one respect for the father, that his business avocations
are imperative, and so in some measure distract him from his grief; but
they at the same time prevent his supervision of home affairs, even if
he be one of those effeminate men—happily few—who love to meddle in
domestic matters. With the best of servants, and even with some female
relative to ‘manage’ for him, the chances are very great that many
things go wrong—that children are either spoiled or neglected, and that
daily incidents so remind him of his loss, that his sorrow even after
a long interval remains unassuaged. Surely, under such circumstances
to marry again is often the wisest thing a widower can do. As he has
had experience of married life, it is presumable that he knows the
qualities in a woman which will make him happy, and is less likely to
make an imprudent marriage than a young bachelor is. In point of fact,
second wives are often very admirable women, and second marriages very
happy ones.

Yet it cannot be denied that the step-mother is, as a rule, looked on
with suspicion by the relatives of the children who pass into her care.
It seems to be of no account that hitherto she has been noted for good
sense and kindness of heart—it is taken for granted that she cannot
exercise these qualities in reference to the little creatures intrusted
to her charge. The cruel thing is that children are often absolutely
set against their father’s wife by foolish people, who think they thus
do homage to the memory of the dead.

‘Ah,’ sighs perhaps an aunt; ‘of course, my dear, you must call her
“mother” if your father wishes it; but you must not expect her to love
you as darling mamma did.’

‘But, auntie,’ the child may respond, ready with tears at the mention
of the dead—‘but, auntie, she says she loves us, and kisses us as if
she did.’

Upon which the auntie moans again, and with an expressive shake of the
head, ejaculates: ‘I hope she does’—in a tone that implies, ‘I don’t
believe it.’

Children are wonderfully quick at interpreting tones, looks, and
gestures.

Children are by no means all little angels, whatever certain poets
may have written in laudation of them. Ingrained characteristics show
themselves very early; and when the fire of rebellion to authority is
kindled in their young hearts—smoulder as it may—it makes the task of
governing them terribly difficult. How much wiser and kinder would it
be if friends and relatives played the part of cheerful peacemakers,
instead of grave-faced watchers and doubters! How really sensible
it would be to teach the children that they ought to be grateful to
her who comes to console their father, and to take upon herself the
dead mother’s duties. In a multitude of cases, this truth ought to be
emphatically inculcated; for we suppose there are few women whose ideal
of happiness is marrying a widower with children.

When the second marriage takes place comparatively late in life, and
when children are grown up, the trials are of a different sort. Sons
already away from home, and making for themselves careers in the world;
and daughters of twenty years old, likely to marry within the next
few years, have often but little feeling for the loneliness of their
father’s declining years. Of course, elderly men sometimes do foolish
things, as well as young ones; but even if the second marriage be in
every respect a suitable one, the children are in too many instances
jealous of the step-mother, and inclined to carp at all she does.
Really, a great deal of this ill-feeling is a bad habit of thought, the
result of a popular prejudice which falls in with the weak side of
human nature.

But if we demur against the prevailing idea of step-mothers, what shall
we say against the yet more absurd notions which abound concerning
Mothers-in-law! Unjustly and, one may say, stupidly satirised as they
are by pen and pencil in the comic papers, they still, as a rule,
maintain the even tenor of their way, far more often as a beneficent
influence than anything else. Represented as a synonym for everything
that is meddling and mischief-making, we confess that in a pretty long
experience we have seen but few very nearly approaching this type. But
we have known many a mother who has taken the husband of a daughter to
her heart as if he were indeed a son, he requiting her affection with
reverential regard. Nor is this at all an unnatural thing to happen
between right-minded sensible people.

The mother of grown-up sons and daughters is not generally the vulgar,
ill-favoured shrew that caricaturists love to paint her; on the
contrary, she is often a woman in the prime of life, very probably
an influence in society, and with the wisdom that ought to come with
experience of the world. She has not forgotten her own youth, and she
sympathises with the young more than they quite believe. Whether it be
the daughter’s husband or the son’s wife that has to be considered,
so long as the choice be tolerably prudent, she is sure to rejoice at
the prospect of happiness, and be grateful that the perils of unwise
likings are over. If, unhappily, the choice has not been prudent, and
yet she is unable to avert its consequences, the mother is in many
cases the one to be peacemaker and make the best of everything. If
it be a son’s wife who needs culture, she tries to give it; if it be
a daughter’s husband of small means, she ekes out income by personal
sacrifices; or if she herself be too poor to do this, we have known her
to help with the needle, or in some other efficient manner, when she
cannot do so with the purse.

Suppose the mother-in-law does sometimes suggest or advise, is this to
be considered an unpardonable offence? In point of fact, her error is
often on the other side, and through a dread of seeming to interfere,
she refrains from speaking the wise word in due season. Carlyle says
somewhere that ‘experience teaches like no other,’ but takes terribly
high ‘school-wages’ in the process. Most of us can remember occasions
when we might have been spared some of the ‘school-wages,’ if we would
have accepted, as a loving gift to profit by, the experience of our
elders. How often in illness does the mother-in-law aid in nursing her
grandchildren; how often, in some inevitable absence of the parents,
does she prove their most trustworthy guardian!

We are afraid, however, that it is mainly when she is a widow and poor,
that the mother-in-law becomes the butt of inconsiderate satirists, who
fail to see the pathetic side of her position. Yet, to the honour of
human nature, it may be said that there are multitudes of households in
which the wife or husband’s mother, wholly dependent on her children,
is treated with the respect and affection proper to the circumstances,
and without any associations that can recall the paltry witticisms
of the comic writers. We wonder if young mothers, with their children
still around them, speculate on the swiftly passing years which will
change the scene! In a single decade, what alterations may there not be
in the domestic circle, and how naturally may it come to pass that the
daughter-in-law of to-day shall become the mother-in-law of the future.

There is another unpopular personage for whom we desire to say a good
word; not that, as a rule, she is immaculate, or even as nearly so as
we should like to see her—we mean the Lodging-house Keeper. She, too,
has long been a favourite theme of the caricaturist, and no doubt her
vocation leads up to many humorous incidents. What a life it is, if
we think of it seriously for a moment! Homely but shrewd women who
let lodgings often acquire a surprising knowledge of character; and
indeed, if they do not, they are likely to be wofully deceived. It is
as great a mistake to suppose that all tenants are true and just in
their dealings, as that all landladies are grasping and untrustworthy.
Imagine a small furnished house being let to a middle-aged couple for
three years at a low rent, mainly because there were no children to add
to the wear and tear of furniture. But events proved that there were
little grandchildren who paid lengthened visits, on which occasions a
perambulator was ruthlessly wheeled about the new dining-room carpet,
and similar reckless destruction of property went on in many other
ways. This is a true story, and we do not much wonder that the landlady
lost temper, and not being able to turn out her tenants, tried to
recoup herself by all legitimate methods—especially as she was wholly
dependent on her house for the means of existence.

It ought to be remembered that people do not let lodgings for pleasure;
receiving inmates is always more or less a matter of business, and
there should be justice and the doing as you would be done by on both
sides. Sometimes the lodging-house keeper is a decayed gentlewoman,
but more generally she belongs to a class socially inferior to that
of her tenants. In either case, a little kindly consideration for the
feelings and interests of the householder will often be amply requited.
The decayed gentlewoman will keenly appreciate a manner of speaking and
bargaining which seems to recognise her true position; and the ordinary
lodging-house keeper is quick to distinguish ‘real gentlefolks’ from
‘stuck-up people,’ by signs which the latter rarely comprehend.

People of position resorting to the seaside for a few weeks never
expect the luxuries and elegances they enjoy at home; but as they
generally pay liberally for the accommodation they receive, they do
require ordinary comforts. It would be greatly to the interest of all
parties if lodging-house keepers would bear this in mind. Not only
should bedding be faultless in point of purity, but as men do exist of
six feet high and upwards, provision should be made to receive a tall
inmate who could sleep without doubling himself up like a carpenter’s
rule. White curtains are decidedly countrified and clean-looking; but
unless there are also shutters to the bedroom windows, woe betide the
light sleeper who is wakened by the early dawn. Lodging-house pillows
should be more ample, and blankets more numerous than they generally
are; easy-chairs should deserve their name; footstools should be
discoverable; and windows and blinds should be easily manageable. The
lodging-house cooking is also often capable of improvement, though,
if people are content with what is called ‘good plain cooking,’ they
frequently have little reason to complain; especially is this the case
when the lodging-house keepers are retired servants who have lived in
good families.

In return for the essential comforts described, the tenant would
generally be willing to dispense with the ancestral portraits which so
often decorate the walls of furnished lodgings. Staring likenesses,
no doubt they are, of departed worthies; but they always seem to
stare at the tenant with something like reproach at his presence; and
if, as is often the case, they are veritable daubs, they become at
last absolutely irritating. Also most people would rather have space
for their own odds and ends, than see tables and shelves occupied by
heirlooms in the shape of cracked vases incapable of holding water for
flowers, but filled with dusty feathers, paper roses, or dried seaweed.
Not that we despise simple ornaments; happily, many very common things
are very pretty, and quite capable of pleasing the most artistic eye;
it is incongruity which really offends.

But with all their shortcomings, we do not believe that, as a class,
lodging-house keepers deserve the hard things which comic writers,
for the sake of a joke, have said of them. Many a lodging-house
keeper has a pathetic past, and a present that is a severe struggle
for existence; and sometimes their worth is so appreciated that they
make influential friends of their tenants. It is pleasant to hear a
landlady say that she has little need to advertise; she lets her rooms
on the recommendation of people who have occupied them, and often has
the same family over and over again. Where this is the case, we may
be pretty sure that at parting there are none of the mean squabbles
about cracked china or a chipped chair-back which leave a sting of
ill-feeling behind. On the contrary, there is perhaps the recollection
of kind assiduity in illness, or of little services beyond the bond on
one side; and on the other a pleasant consciousness that such services
have been recognised.

It is possible that the tenant sometimes forgets his duties as well as
the landlady hers. It is as grasping to overreach on one side as on
the other. Not long ago an inquiry for lodgings was made in a popular
district—they were to be perfect in a sanitary point of view, and with
householders where valuable property would be safe—but because the
would-be tenant would often be away, the fair applicant hoped to obtain
them for an ‘infinitesimal’ rent. We believe she has not yet quite
succeeded in her search. There are certainly unprincipled as well as
inconsiderate lodgers, besides untrustworthy landladies. We fear there
are quite as many people who, convalescent after infectious diseases,
take apartments in the country or at the seaside without apprising the
householders of their condition; as there are lodging-house keepers
who receive fresh tenants after having housed fever patients without
having taken due precautions against the propagation of disease. In
short, lodgers and tenants belong to the same human nature that is
corrupted by evil influences, and falls but too often, each individual
under his own special temptations.




SPIRITED AWAY.


IN THREE CHAPTERS.—CHAP. II.

I awoke suddenly and with a start, having, while in the act of
stretching myself, brought my foot into violent contact with one of
the rails of the bed. The pain arising from the blow was so acute as
to put sleep out of question for a time, so I sat up in bed and stared
about me; not that there was anything to be seen, not even the outlines
of the window. Everything was intensely still; some hours had probably
elapsed since my coming to bed, and no doubt the inmates of the house
had retired long ago. The neighbourhood was a quiet one, apparently
some distance removed from any main thoroughfare, as not even the noise
of a passing cab or vehicle of any kind broke the silence—nothing, in
fact, save the footsteps of some belated pedestrian, or, it might be,
those of a policeman going his rounds.

When my foot became somewhat easier, I lay down again; but my brain was
in full activity by this time, and I fell to musing over what I had
seen of London during my after-dark ramble, and to building castles
in the future. I was as wide awake as ever I had been in my life. As
I lay thus, the black silence was broken by the faint creaking of a
door, apparently that of the room next my own. Was it merely one of
those unaccountable noises with which all watchers during the night
season are more or less familiar, or was it caused by human agency? It
was probably the _cafetier_ or Jean stealing quietly up-stairs to bed.
I had no means of even guessing the time, and instead of being asleep
for hours, as I had imagined, it might not yet be much past midnight.
Burglars would hardly care to visit so poor a domicile; still, it was
just as well I had shot the bolt of my door before getting into bed.
But, hush! what was that? Footsteps passing my door, and then softly
ascending the upper flight of stairs. Some one was certainly moving
about the house. But for what purpose? And now, there was the sound of
more footsteps following the first. Dead silence for a few moments, and
then footsteps again, but so hushed and stealthy, that it was only by
holding in my breath and listening with all my might, that I could hear
them at all.

What could be the meaning of proceedings so mysterious? While I was
still puzzling over this question and debating with myself whether my
wisest plan would not be to go to sleep and trouble myself no further
in the matter, the door of some room overhead seemed suddenly to be
burst open, followed immediately by a heavy trampling of feet, then
a loud, sharp, inarticulate cry, a pistol-shot, the sound as it were
of a brief struggle, and then nothing but the low stern tones of some
one who seemed to be giving orders or instructions, and after that, a
minute later, silence again the most profound. But I was out of bed
by this time; and groping my way to the door, I pushed back the bolt
and turned the handle, expecting, of course, that the door would open
without difficulty; but it refused to yield to my efforts, and a moment
or two sufficed to convince me that it was fastened from the outside.
I pulled at it with all my strength, and then made out that it was
held merely by a rope, which, yielding slightly to my efforts, left a
space of a couple of inches between the door and the jamb. Planting one
foot firmly against the wall, and pulling open the door with one hand
as far as I could, I felt in my pocket with the other hand, found my
knife, and opened it with my teeth; then, pushing the long sharp blade
through the space between the door and the jamb, I cut through the rope
that held me prisoner. A moment later, I had bounded up the stairs and
had burst into one of the upper rooms, guided by a narrow fringe of
light which shone from under the door. The sight that met my gaze was a
strange one. The room was of considerable size; and seated on the edge
of the bed, and only partially dressed, but bound and gagged, was the
_cafetier_, while no great distance away stood a group of five men, in
one of whom I at once recognised the stranger with the gold spectacles,
although he wore no spectacles now; while another was Jean the waiter.
The other three men I had never to my knowledge seen before. In the
middle of the floor a revolver lay unheeded.

The eyes of all present turned on me like lightning, as I burst into
the room. There was a moment or two of dead silence, then the stranger,
whom for the future I will call M. Legros, in order to distinguish
him from the others—although he was certainly not a Frenchman—strode
towards me with a frown, and demanded by what right I had intruded
there.

‘By the right which every man has to intrude when he hears a cry for
help and believes there’s villainy afloat.’

‘Ah, bah! you talk like a child,’ he answered. ‘There is no villainy
afloat here, young sir—of that you may rest assured. We are neither
thieves nor assassins. What we are in nowise concerns you. Since you
have chosen to intrude here, where your presence was certainly not
required, you have only left one course open to me. You must take the
consequences of your folly.’

He spoke a few words rapidly to the three strangers in a language
unknown to me, and before I knew what was about to happen, I found
myself seized, gagged, bound, and strapped down to a chair, as helpless
as a new-born babe.

‘I am somewhat grieved to have to treat you thus,’ said M. Legros to
me as soon as I had in some measure recovered my breath; ‘but your own
rashness has put it out of my power to do otherwise. I may, however,
tell you this for your comfort: no harm shall befall you, provided you
obey implicitly the orders that may be imposed upon you. But should you
make the slightest effort to escape before the time comes when I shall
be prepared to bid you adieu, or should you endeavour to attract the
attention of any one, you may rest assured that that moment will be the
last of your life. I pray you to take my words in all seriousness. We
are here to do a certain thing, and not a dozen lives will be allowed
to stand in the way of our doing it.’

His tones were low, but very stern; his keen steel-gray eyes seemed
to pierce me through. I never saw a face on which determination and
strength of will were more clearly impressed. He was evidently a man
who, whether for good or ill, would keep his word.

I glanced at Karavich. He was deathly pale, but his eyes glowed in
their cavernous orbits with a sort of gloomy fire, and there was
nothing of dismay or craven fear in the deep-seated gaze he bent now
and again on his captors. Who and what was he? What was his crime? What
had he done that he should be thus seized and gagged in the middle
of the night in his own house and in the heart of London? Then, too,
who and what were Legros and his confederates? I almost forgot my own
predicament for a little while in asking myself these and similar
questions.

Legros and the others were talking in tones that were scarcely raised
above a whisper. When thus conversing among themselves both then and
afterwards, they employed a language with which I had no acquaintance.
It may have been Russian, or Polish, or Hungarian. I have little doubt
it was one of the three, but which one I did not know then, and I do
not know to this day. Suddenly, Legros, after glancing at his watch,
held up a warning finger, and silence at once fell on the group. They
all stood as if listening for some expected sound. A minute later it
came—the slow, heavy tramp of some one passing down the street. Could
it be the night policeman going his rounds? Just as the man, whoever
he might be, was passing, Legros glanced at the window, and my eyes
involuntarily followed the direction of his. The window was shaded with
heavy curtains, now closely drawn; the room was dimly lighted by a
single candle only; from the street, even if the night had been a clear
one, the house must have seemed wrapped in darkness. The silence in
the room remained unbroken till the last faint echoes of the footsteps
outside had died away.

As if this were a signal that had been waited for, all now became
activity. Jean fetched my coat, boots, and other articles from my
bedroom; the bonds that fastened me were unloosed, and I was told to
at once complete my toilet. A similar process took place with regard
to Karavich; but whereas, when he was fully dressed, his arms were at
once strapped down again, in my case, by Legros’ orders, the bonds were
dispensed with. Both of us, however, were still gagged. Presently, a
noise of wheels was faintly audible, which momentarily grew louder
and more distinct. A long dark cloak, the collar of which effectually
muffled the lower part of his face, was hastily thrown over Karavich’s
shoulders, while a wide-brimmed soft felt hat was placed on his head.
This done, he was conducted by two of the men from the room, and I
heard all three descend the stairs. By this time, the vehicle, whatever
it might be, the noise of which we had heard, had drawn up opposite the
house. Half a minute later, we heard it drive away, and presently all
sound of it was lost in the distance.

Had Karavich been forced away in it? And if so, why, and whither was
he being taken? But scarcely had I time to formulate these queries in
my mind, before the noise of approaching wheels became audible for the
second time. A cloak, similar to that in which the _cafetier_ had been
enveloped, was now thrown over my shoulders, and the collar turned up
round my face. After a few whispered words of warning from Legros, I
was told to follow him down-stairs as noiselessly as possible, which I
proceeded to do, the fourth man bringing up the rear. By this time the
second vehicle had drawn up opposite the door. The lower part of the
house and the shop were in utter darkness. Legros took me by the hand
and guided me the way I was to go. Some one—Jean, I take it to have
been—stood by the outer door, and opened it silently as we drew near;
and so, without a word, we three passed out into the street. The fog
had thinned somewhat, but not to any great extent. The light of a lamp
on the opposite side of the street showed like a faint blurred point of
flame seen from afar. A vehicle, which by that dim light had all the
appearance of an ordinary London four-wheeled cab, with a man seated on
the box, was drawn up close to the kerb. So much I was enabled to see,
but no more. I was hurried at once into the vehicle; Legros and the
other man got in after me; the door was shut without noise; the windows
were drawn up; Jean, whom we left behind, said something to the driver;
and a moment later, we were being driven rapidly away.

I was utterly at a loss to know the time; but judging by the solitude
of the streets and the infrequency with which we encountered any other
vehicles, it must have been still very early in the morning. Even if
the night had been a perfectly clear one, there was nothing in our
appearance to attract the notice of the most suspicious of policemen. A
cab containing two or three occupants at an early hour in the morning
in London streets, is too common an object to call for a second glance
from any one who may encounter it.

We were a silent party. None of us spoke after we entered the vehicle.
My companions lay back with folded arms and their hats drawn over their
brows. Whether they were asleep or awake, it was impossible for me
to determine. My thoughts had ample time to busy themselves with any
number of perplexing problems before our drive came to an end, which it
did, as nearly as I could judge, in about an hour’s time. We had got
off the paved streets some time before this, and were now driving over
an ordinary macadamised road. Suddenly we drew up, and the same moment
my two companions became on the alert.

‘Pardon me,’ said M. Legros as he drew a silk muffler from one of
his pockets, ‘but it is necessary that I should blindfold you for a
few minutes.’ Then he added: ‘Do implicitly as you are told; have
confidence in me, and no harm shall befall you.’

Some one outside had apparently opened a pair of gates by this time;
we went through, passed forward a little way farther at a walking
pace, and then came to a final stand. Before this, the deft fingers
of M. Legros had effectually bandaged my eyes. The carriage-door was
now opened, and one of my companions giving me his hand, helped me to
alight, and then led me forward. There was an ascent of three or four
steps, and then I felt that I had passed out of the cold night-air
into the warmer atmosphere of a house. A minute later, my eyes were
unbandaged, and, better still, the gag was removed from my mouth.

I found myself in a large and elegantly furnished room, lighted by a
lamp on the centre table, and by candles in the girandoles over the
chimney-piece. A wood-fire burned cheerfully in the grate. Standing
with his back to it, and watching my look of amazement with an amused,
cynical smile, was M. Legros. We were alone.

‘I hope you feel none the worse for your little journey?’ he said. ‘We
shall have a longer one to take presently, so I think the best thing we
can do is to make due preparation for it.’

‘Another journey!’ I stammered. ‘Where to, this time?’

‘That you will learn when the proper time arrives,’ he answered dryly.

‘And Karavich—will he accompany us?’ I asked.

‘Ah, bah! why trouble yourself about Karavich?’ he demanded, with a
contraction of his brows. ‘He is nothing to you, nor you to him.’ Then
a moment later he added, almost as if speaking to himself: ‘But yes;
_ce cher_ Karavich will accompany us certainly. We cannot afford to
leave _him_ behind.’

At this juncture, a servant appeared with a tray containing a cold
chicken together with other comestibles. This was supplemented by a
second tray on which were coffee, wines, and liqueurs. ‘Come,’ said
Legros with a smile, as he sat down on a chair which the man had placed
for him, ‘let us make ourselves what you English call jolly.’

‘Jolly!’ I ejaculated with a miserable attempt at a laugh. ‘I’m likely
to feel jolly under such circumstances as these!’

‘Why not?’ he demanded blandly. ‘Ah, _mon enfant_, when you have lived
as long as I have, you will have learnt that the truest philosophy is
to enjoy the present while you can, and leave the future to take care
of itself. Sit, and let me assist you to a wing of this fowl; or what
say you to this mayonnaise? It looks as if it might tempt an anchorite.’

‘I am not hungry; I cannot eat.’

‘Foolish boy! Remember you have a long cold journey before you. Try, at
least, a couple of these caviare sandwiches.’

I shook my head. ‘I will take a cup of coffee, nothing more.’

M. Legros pulled the ends of his moustache, but made no further attempt
to persuade me; so, while I sat and sipped my coffee, he went on with
his supper—if supper it could be called. He was a quick eater, and in a
few minutes he rose and pushed back his chair.

After the servant left the room, except for the opening or shutting of
a distant door once or twice, no sounds from without were audible. I
neither heard nor saw anything either of Karavich or the others. But
scarcely had M. Legros risen from the table, when once more we heard
the noise of wheels—the noise as of some heavy vehicle, which, after
being driven slowly up to the house, came to a halt. In the hush which
followed, one could hear the pawing of the horses on the gravel and the
champing of their bits. I noticed that my companion was listening as
intently as I was. ‘I must ask you to remain here till I rejoin you,’
he said presently. ‘I shall not be more than a few minutes away;’ and
with that he smiled, nodded, and left the room.

I had plenty of food for thought during his absence; but those readers
who have followed me thus far will scarcely need to be enlightened as
to the tenor of my reflections. They were anything but comforting.
Scant time was, however, afforded me for perplexed broodings.
Presently, a distant door seemed to open, and then came the half-hushed
sound of the footsteps of several people advancing along the corridor
into which the door of my room opened, then passing the door itself,
and then being gradually lost in the distance. The men, whoever they
might be, walked slowly and carefully and as though they were carrying
some heavy burden. A few moments later, I could distinguish the
voices of several people talking in low tones outside the house. My
curiosity overmastered my prudence. The room had two windows, both of
them having venetian blinds, now closely shut, and, in addition, long
heavy curtains that reached the ground. Crossing quickly to one of the
windows, I stepped behind the curtain, and then cautiously raising one
of the laths of the blind a little way, I peered through the crevice.
The sight which met my eyes was one that might well make the blood of
a braver man than I profess to be run cold. The fog had cleared away,
and by the aid of the starlight, I could just make out what seemed to
me the outlines of a hearse, with a pair of horses, standing a few
yards away in the courtyard or space of ground which fronted the house.
While I was still staring at this grim apparition, a couple of men
carrying lighted lanterns appeared on the scene; then I saw clearly
that the object I had been gazing at was indeed a hearse, but denuded
of its plumes. But scarcely had I time to note this, when a procession
of some half-dozen men appeared, walking two and two, and carrying on
their shoulders something long, black, and heavy. For one moment I was
puzzled, and then the dread certainty flashed upon me that the burden
they bent under was a coffin, but not an empty one. When they came
within the dim circle of light given out by the lanterns, it became
plainly visible. I could bear no more. I let the blind drop, and turned
away with a cold sick dread at my heart, such as I had never felt
before. Had a murder just been perpetrated under that silent roof, and
if so——? A dozen ghastly questions surged through my brain, not one of
which I was able to answer. A few minutes later I heard, through my
half-dazed senses, the hearse move away a little distance, and a second
vehicle drive up and take its place. Then in came M. Legros in his
overcoat and hat.

‘All is in readiness for the second stage of our journey,’ he said as
he rubbed his chilled hands for a few moments over the fire.

I did not answer him. He looked sharply at me, and as he did so, a
cold, dangerous glitter came into his eyes. His gaze travelled to the
window, and then back to my face, and then he muttered something under
his breath that sounded like a malediction. He was still bending over
the grate; but when next his eyes met mine, all trace of annoyance had
vanished.

‘You look as white, my friend, as if you had just seen a ghost,’ he
remarked with that inscrutable smile of his. ‘You have gone too long
without food. However, there’s no time now. Here, drink this,’ he
added; and with that he crossed to the table and poured out a small
glass of some sort of liqueur. I took it mechanically and drank it.
Then Legros handed me the fur-lined cloak and my hat, and then he said:
‘Once more, and I hope for the last time.’ With that he produced the
silk muffler and bandaged my eyes; then taking me by the hand, he led
me from the room.




HOW TO PROVE A WILL.


IN ENGLAND.

A great change has come over the procedure in proving wills and
obtaining administration in England within the last thirty years.
Formerly it was a mysterious, difficult, and expensive process, which
few people understood; and he who had to undertake such duties was
glad to place himself in the hands of a proctor, and, it may be added,
was usually glad to get out of them again. The proceeding is now much
more simple and intelligible, and when the property is small, is very
inexpensive.

Probate, Administration, and the ‘Death Duties,’ as the taxes levied on
inheritances have been appropriately named, are no doubt amongst the
gloomiest of topics falling to be discussed in the columns of a popular
journal. There are very few people of adult years, however, who have
not been forced to make acquaintance with these matters in some form or
other and at some time or other; and a brief account of the subject,
and of the best and cheapest method of proceeding, may not be without
value when the pinch of action arrives. To the poor, the knowledge
that a legal title to the little properties left by their relatives
can be obtained for a few shillings, and with next to no trouble,
would seem to be especially desirable. To richer folk, the subject may
recommend itself in another fashion. Constituted as men are, it is very
certain that the distribution of property amongst survivors forms a not
inconsiderable item of the alleviations provided by Mother Nature for
the pain of inevitable losses by death, although the generality of us
would undoubtedly refuse to indorse the remarkably frank declaration of
a hard-hearted modern poet:

    Sweet is a legacy, and passing sweet
      The unexpected death of some old lady
    Or gentleman of seventy years complete,
      Who’ve made ‘us youth’ wait too, too long already.

Up to a little more than a quarter of a century ago, the business
connected with the proof and custody of wills and the granting of
administration in England, was conducted by officers appointed by
the archbishops and bishops of the Established Church. In every city
which was the seat of a bishop’s see, a court existed, called the
Diocesan Court, presided over nominally by the archbishop or bishop,
but really by a proctor or barrister, who was the representative or
‘official principal’ of the ecclesiastical dignitary; with a limited
number of proctors—that is, ecclesiastical lawyers—who possessed
the exclusive privilege of proving wills, and whose posts were very
lucrative and much coveted. Besides these Diocesan Courts, a multitude
of smaller courts were scattered up and down the country, variously
called Archidiaconal, Prebendal, Peculiar, or Manorial Courts, all
having the power of making grants of probate or administration in their
respective localities, and whose operations frequently resulted in
confusion, uncertainty, and needless expense. An investigation into the
origin of these small courts discloses in almost all cases curious and
interesting features of those times when the authority of the Church
penetrated deeply into every portion of society, and into nearly every
transaction of life.

All these courts, large and small, were swept away in 1857. After
several abortive attempts by successive governments, and in the teeth
of great opposition from the interests affected, a measure was carried
through parliament, mainly by the energy of Lord Westbury, abolishing
the entire system, and creating a court new to English jurisprudence,
the Court of Probate. The antique fabric embracing the Prerogative,
Diocesan, and Peculiar Courts, with their vicars-general, ordinaries,
advocates, surrogates, and apparitors, vanished like a dream before
this drastic ordinance. The exclusive privileges of the proctors
were put an end to, and all kinds of testamentary business thrown
open to the legal profession. It was a rather costly process. Large
compensations had to be paid to the superseded functionaries, as is not
unusual in such cases; but the extinction of an effete system, and the
substitution of a tribunal and a procedure adequate to the requirements
of the times, were imperatively called for.

The Court of Probate thus constituted is not only a court for hearing
and determining causes connected with contested wills and disputes
among next of kin as to the right to property, but possesses also
effective administrative machinery for the granting of probate and
letters of administration. A principal Registry at Somerset House in
London, and thirty-nine District Registries distributed over England
and Wales, are attached to the court, and from these registries the
grants of probate and administration with which most people are
familiar issue.

Did the reader ever prove a will? The phrase has a rather formidable
sound, but the proceeding is a sufficiently tame and prosaic affair.
A will is ordinarily ‘proved’ in the following manner: The executor
named in the will takes it to a solicitor, and furnishes him with
particulars of the name, residence, and date of death of the testator;
his (the executor’s) own name, residence, business, and relationship to
the deceased; with an account of the nature and value of the property.
This information is embodied in two affidavits—printed forms with
blanks left for the details—which the executor signs, and is sworn
to. The will and affidavits are then lodged by the solicitor either
in the principal probate registry in London or in one of the district
registries, according to the locality in which the testator resided.
The documents being in proper order, a form on parchment is filled up
in the probate registry, reciting the particulars contained in the
affidavits; and to this form is attached a copy of the will, likewise
written on parchment. The two together constitute ‘the probate;’ and
when this is signed by the registrar and sealed with the seal of the
court, the will is said to be ‘proved.’ The original will is forthwith
enrolled and indexed in the books of the registry, where it can be
perused by any person on payment of a fee of one shilling.

In proving a will, the executor may now either employ a solicitor to
prepare the affidavits and take all trouble off his hands, as mentioned
above, or he may apply personally at the registry for probate.
Facilities for so doing are provided by law, and the grant is obtained
at a lower charge than would have to be paid if the services of a
professional man were engaged. The _modus operandi_ is as follows:
The executor himself lodges the will in the probate registry, and
furnishes to the officers there the particulars already enumerated as
to the testator, himself, and the property. The necessary affidavits
are prepared in the registry, and there signed and sworn to by the
executor, who must at the same time pay the registry charges and the
probate duty. In case the attestation clause to the will is wanting,
or is not in the form required by law—circumstances which frequently
occur—a further affidavit is prepared; and one of the witnesses to the
signing of the will must attend at the registry and be sworn to such
affidavit. In a few days afterwards, the probate of the will is issued
to the executor, who can then proceed to deal with the property.

When a deceased person has made no will, but has left money, furniture,
shares, or other property not being land or houses, the law steps in,
and in effect makes a will for him, by dividing such property amongst
his nearest kindred in certain proportions, which are pretty generally
known. The instrument authorising a particular person to make the
division is called Letters of Administration. If the deceased has
left a widow, she is the person entitled to administer; if no widow,
then the children; and if no children, then the relative nearest in
blood. The widow or relative applying for administration attends at the
probate registry in the same way and furnishes the same particulars
as an executor who applies for probate of a will, with this addition,
that the applicant for administration must enter into bond, and
provide two persons of full age, who are willing to become his or her
sureties for the faithful distribution of the property. Whether the
estate of a deceased person be large or small in amount, the executor
or administrator has the option of applying personally at a probate
registry for the grant, and in every case by so doing he effects a
considerable saving of expense.

The fiscal legislation of the last few years has been very favourable
and indulgent to persons administering small estates. At the present
time, if a man dies without a will leaving personal property not
exceeding a hundred pounds, his widow or children can apply to the
probate registry of the district—or if residing more than three
miles from such a registry, to the registrar of the County Court of
the district—for letters of administration; and the grant will cost
only from five to thirteen shillings, according to the value of the
property. The children of a widow are entitled to the same privilege.

Again, when a man or woman dies a little better off, either with or
without a will, if the whole personal estate does not exceed three
hundred pounds, application can be made to the probate registry of the
district—or if there be no registry near, to the Inland Revenue office
of the nearest town—for a grant of probate or administration. All the
necessary papers will be prepared at one or other of these offices;
and the grant will be issued on payment of thirty shillings for duty
and fifteen shillings for fees. In case the property does not exceed
one hundred pounds, on payment of fifteen shillings for fees only. In
none of these instances will the property be liable to legacy or other
additional duty. The deceased’s debts, however, are not allowed to be
deducted in order to bring the property under these amounts, and the
privilege is restricted to the cases of persons who have died since
the 1st of June 1881. Those who remember how costly was the process of
proving a will or obtaining administration in the old ecclesiastical
courts, however small the property might be, and those who more
recently have had to pay their solicitor’s bill for the same services,
will be aware that the substitution of this low tariff is a boon of
a substantial character to all interested in the transfer of small
estates at death.

While recent legislation has been thus favourable to the poorer
classes, and has lessened the expense of obtaining grants in all cases
where application is made in person at the probate registry, it has
also introduced a much needed reform in the mode of levying the probate
duty. The debts owing by any person at death can now be deducted from
the amount of the personal property, leaving probate duty to be paid on
the remainder only. Formerly, duty was required to be paid on the gross
amount of the personal assets without any deduction whatever for debts.
It is true that after debts were actually paid, application might be
made to the Inland Revenue authorities for a return of the duty or a
portion of the duty in respect of them; but difficulty and delay were
sometimes experienced in obtaining such returns of duty, and frequent
hardships were inflicted. Thus, where the property of a deceased person
was nominally under a large amount, and the debts were almost as large,
there was obviously no fund out of which probate duty could be paid.
The executor was consequently out of pocket, often for a considerable
time, and a disinclination to undertake such responsibilities was the
natural result.


IN SCOTLAND.

The Scottish law applicable to wills has had an ecclesiastical history
as well as that of England. The clergy were permitted to exercise
jurisdiction in regard to divorce and succession because they were
supposed to be ‘just persons,’ as also because they knew the art of
writing better than most other ancient judges. Modern probate law
does not differ materially in the two ends of the island, except in
nomenclature. The chief distinction is that in Scotland a will does not
require any ‘probate’ or proving; it proves itself, if it be signed
before witnesses; and if it be holograph—that is, in the handwriting
of the testator—its authenticity or validity is assumed, so long as
not impugned. The Scottish analogue of English probate is obtaining
confirmation of the executor. If the executor be named in the will, he
takes it to a lawyer: the lawyer makes up an inventory of the estate
of the deceased. This inventory is stamped at a revenue office by a
stamp corresponding in cost to the amount of the estate. The stamped
inventory, after being sworn to before a justice of the peace, is
presented to the sheriff-clerk of the county in which the deceased
had his ordinary domicile. The sheriff-clerk, in the interests of the
revenue, satisfies himself that the stamp is correct as to pecuniary
amount, and then grants confirmation under the seal of the court. That
confirmation is equivalent to a judicial warrant to collect every
debt and realise every asset specified in the inventory. If there
be no will, or no executor named in the will, the sheriff appoints
an executor, or executors, according to a recognised order, those
equally near in blood, or having an equal interest in the estate, being
appointed jointly; a proceeding which corresponds to the granting of
letters of administration by the English Probate Court.

Scotland, of course, as well as England, enjoys the benefit of the
statutory provisions applicable to estates under three hundred
pounds. The persons entitled to succeed, or one of them, can do all
that is necessary to transfer the estate from the dead to the living
without the intervention of a lawyer or the burden of his bill of
costs. He can go to the sheriff-clerk of the county of the domicile,
give the requisite information; and the sheriff-clerk will do all
that is necessary towards the giving of confirmation, for a fee that
is regulated by the amount of the estate, but which is a merely
nominal fee compared with what would fall to be charged by a regular
professional man.

The courts of Scotland, as a rule, decline to interfere with the
administration of the estates of deceased foreigners, among whom
Englishmen are included. It is a necessary condition to a Scotch
court confirming an executor or appointing one that the domicile of
the deceased shall have been in Scotland. Some of the English courts
are guided by much more expansive ideas of their duty, and will take
charge of the estate of any man, if it be large enough to promise
remuneration to Chancery and Probate practitioners. Within the last
few years, the English Court of Chancery extended its long arm to
administer the estates of Sir W. Stirling-Maxwell, formerly M.P.
for Perthshire; and for years the officials of Chancery directed
the management of his large Scotch heritable properties of Keir and
Pollok, of course with such copious intelligence as Chancery persons
have in regard to every property out of which money can be extracted,
but perhaps not at a rate of remuneration quite so moderate as would
have sufficed, had the greed of English lawyers and the benevolence
of English judges permitted the estates of this eminent patriotic
Scotchman to be administered according to the law of his own country. A
similar stroke of usurpation was more recently attempted in regard to
the estate of Orr Ewing. Less than the hundredth part of that estate,
which exceeded in value a quarter of a million, had been left to a
young man resident in London. This young man was under twenty-one,
and therefore an English ‘infant,’ unable to take care of himself.
Some officious person, calling himself a ‘next friend’ of this infant,
attempted to have all this large estate transferred from Scotland to
the Court of Chancery; and the Court of Chancery very kindly did what
it could to gratify the zeal of this ‘next friend’ for the interest
of the infant—and perhaps of some lawyers—of not very tender years.
But this usurpation was resisted by the Scotch beneficiaries and by
the Scotch courts. The House of Lords decided distinctly that the
English Courts acted according to their precedents when they made
this usurpation of jurisdiction over Scotch estates; and they decided
also, but a good deal less distinctly, that the Scotch courts did not
exceed their jurisdiction in resisting this usurpation. The courts of
law in London and Edinburgh are thus in conflict; and the claims of
each have so far obtained the sanction of the supreme tribunal of the
country, that hereafter, unless the legislature interfere, no large
Scotch succession can be considered safe from the purely benevolent but
somewhat expensive supervision of the English Court of Chancery.




AN OCEAN MYSTERY.

A TRUE STORY.


Though it is nearly twenty years ago since the events related below
occurred, yet the impression left upon my mind has never faded or lost
the vividness of its outlines; and though there is nothing really
inexplicable about it, yet the dash of mystery connected with it has
always marked it in my memory as an incident of an unusual order.

We were driving on our way northwards from the gloomy and savage
neighbourhood of Cape Horn, homeward-bound in Her Majesty’s frigate
the dear old _Bruisewater_, now, alas, long since consigned to the
shipbreaker. The fact of our being homeward-bound should have made
all hearts light and all faces bright among our five hundred souls;
but for all that, there was a general air of gloom in the ship,
which was not to be accounted for save by one theory only—that of
superstition. For things had not gone well with us since we had hoisted
our homeward-bound pendant. True, we had sailed out of Valparaiso Bay
with the said pendant streaming away, and with all our ‘chummy ships’
playing _Should Auld Acquaintance be forgot?_ as we passed by them;
and we had received and returned cheer upon cheer as we made our way
to the open sea; while from the midshipmen’s berth had rolled up in a
rich volume of sound, every night for more than a week before, the
old strain, so well known and so lovingly cherished in Her Majesty’s
service:

    And when we arrive at Plymouth Docks,
    The pretty little girls come round in flocks,
    And one to the other they do say:
    ‘Oh, here comes Jack with his three years’ pay;
    For I see he’s homeward-bou-ou-ound,
    For I see he’s homeward-bound.’

But still, as I say, things had not gone well with us. We had speedily
left the warmth of tropical weather, and had gradually found it colder
and colder each morning as we made our way down south towards the
dreaded Cape of Storms. That was natural, and we were prepared for
it; but no sooner had we got to the latitude of the Cape itself, than
the wind had shifted, and we had it day after day, night after night,
a hard gale right in our teeth. Bitter cold it was too, with tearing
storms of snow and hail—heavy thundering seas sweeping us fore and
aft, bursting in upon our weather-bow, and covering us with spray,
that froze ere it fell upon our decks. Up aloft, everything frozen
hard—running rigging as stiff and unmanageable as a steel hawser;
blocks jammed with ice and snow; canvas as unyielding as a board; men
up aloft for an hour or more trying to take a reef in the fore-topsail,
and then so stiffened with cold themselves, as to be unable to come
down without assistance: while below, the close, musty, damp, dark ship
was the picture of discomfort, her decks, main and lower, always wet,
often with an inch or two of ice-cold water washing about on them;
soaking clothes hung up all over the place, in the wild hope that they
might eventually get dry; ports and scuttles tight shut, to keep out
the seas that thundered ceaselessly at them as the ship plunged and
wallowed in the angry element; no fires allowed anywhere except at the
cook’s galley, which was always fully occupied; and no warmth to be
obtained anywhere except in your hammock, and even this, in most cases,
what with faulty stowage and leaky decks, was wet through.

Day after day, night after night, this state of things kept on, until
there gradually crept in among the men—started, no doubt, by the older
hands, always and deeply imbued with the spirit of superstition—a
sort of dim suspicion that the ship was under a ban—bewitched, in
fact; that, as they said, there was a Jonah aboard; and until he
went overboard, we should never weather the dreaded Cape, but were
doomed to thrash continually to windward, never gaining an inch on our
way. Strange as it may seem, there were many, very many, among our
blue-jackets who held this belief firmly, and expressed it openly.
We, of course, in the midshipmen’s berth, careless and light-hearted
from our extreme youth, laughed at the solemn tones of the old
quartermasters, who employed their hours of midnight watch on deck
in narrating to us similar instances of vessels which had been thus
doomed to struggle with the storm until some unknown criminal had
either confessed his crime, or had voluntarily paid the penalty of it.
But, as the bad weather continued, and the ship seemed quite unable to
advance upon her homeward track, some of us, too, began to allow our
minds to be influenced to a certain degree by the mysterious language
and ominous hints of these men, so much our elders in years, and our
superiors in practical experience.

Matters had got to this pitch, and no change appeared about to take
place in the aspect of the weather or the direction of the wind, when
one wild and wretched forenoon at seven bells (eleven-thirty) the men
were piped to muster on the main-deck for that one drop of comfort
which they could look forward to in the day—the serving out of each
man’s ‘tot’ of grog. Faces which at other times wore a look of gloom,
were brightening under the influence of the spirit; the ever-present
growl was stilled for a while; the joke began to pass around as
the blood warmed and flowed more rapidly through the veins, when a
whisper—a sort of muttered suggestion, made at first with a kind of
apologetic reluctance, but with growing confidence and insistence as it
gained ground—passed through the throng of men that one of their number
was missing. Such a whisper makes its way through a ship’s company,
however large, like a current of electricity, and so it was in this
case; but at first the men kept it to themselves. It could not long,
however, be concealed; and presently it spread to the midshipmen’s
berth; next, the wardroom heard it; and soon the captain himself was
made aware of the suspicion. Well I remember, how, as we sat in the
cold, damp, comfortless, dirty berth, discussing the matter with boyish
eagerness, the sudden shrill pipe of the boatswain’s mate burst upon
our ears, followed by the hoarse cry of: ‘Hands muster by open list!’
So, then, the captain thought it important enough to make serious and
official inquiry into. Then came the calling over of those five hundred
names, with most of which we had been familiar for three years or more
of our commission in the Pacific. But I am wrong—not quite all of those
five hundred. There came a time when the name of one, a petty officer,
was called; but no reply came to the call, and a dead silence reigned
over the ship—a silence, I mean, as regards human speech or sound:
the gale and the thundering seas never for a moment ceased _their_
tumult. Then followed the grave and searching investigation into the
mystery. Who had seen him last? Where was he then? In what state? How
long ago was it? and so on, and so on; until at last the whole ship’s
company knew that one of their number had gone overboard—presumably
in the morning watch; probably swept off by a peculiarly heavy sea,
well remembered in that watch. But unknown, unheard, unseen—his cry
for help, if such a cry he gave, utterly drowned and smothered in the
ceaseless roar of the sea, the shriek of the wind. And so the men were
dismissed, each to his special duty; and the paymaster was directed to
see that the fatal letters D.D. (Discharged dead) were placed against
the unhappy man’s name in the ship’s books.

And now occurred a circumstance which took the whole ship by storm, as
it were, and which, mere accident and coincidence as it was, made all
the old seadogs nod their heads and eye the younger men meaningly, as
who would say, ‘What did I tell you?’ while they, on their part, were
firmly impressed with the lesson in cause and effect thus so pointedly
placed before them. It was close upon noon when the fact of a man
being lost was clearly established; and ere the afternoon watch was
over, the sky had cleared, the storm had dropped, the wind had shifted
right round, and was now blowing dead fair! There was no room for more
argument—the oldsters had it all their own way; the scoffers were
silenced.

The ship now, in a few hours, rounded the Cape, which before had seemed
an impossible obstruction to her, and made her way unhindered to the
north; but the feelings engendered by the events immediately preceding
this change had taken too strong a hold upon the men to pass lightly
away, and in many a long first or middle watch the subject of the
disappearance of the lost shipmate and its immediate effect upon the
elements was discussed with bated breath, and many an ominous shake
of the head was given as the opinion was moodily expressed that ‘We’d
not done with him yet.’ And when, a few days afterwards, on a Sunday
morning during divine service, the quartermaster of the watch came
creeping and tiptoeing down the ladder to report something to the
commander, who at once followed him silently up the after-hatchway,
but a few minutes afterwards returned and whispered mysteriously to
the captain, who in his turn mounted on deck and did not come down
again, we all felt that perhaps something more might be in store for
us, and was even now perchance at hand. How impatiently we sat as
the sermon dragged out its seemingly interminable length, and then,
when at last the blessing had been given and the quick sharp voice
of the first-lieutenant had issued the order, ‘Boatswain’s mate,
pipe down!’ we literally tumbled up on deck, to learn what it was
that had disturbed the calm of that Sabbath forenoon. It needed but
a glance. ‘Icebergs!’ There they were, a long array of cold, filmy,
shadowy giants, looming huge in the mist with which each surrounded
himself—ghostly, ghastly, clammy spectres from the very land of Death
itself. Not that we thought of them then as such; no, we were glad,
we youngsters; we liked them; we said they were ‘jolly,’ though any
object less gifted with an aspect of joviality one can hardly imagine.
Each, as we neared it, wrapped us in its clammy shroud of death-cold
fog, and chilled us to the very marrow, and, towering far above our
main-royal-mast head, seemed to threaten us with instant and appalling
destruction.

So we sped on, iceberg after iceberg rising above the horizon as we
held our course; and, if sources of anxiety and alarm by day, how much
more so by night! Often we entered a vast bank of impenetrable fog,
conscious that somewhere, in its inmost recesses, lay concealed, as if
waiting for its prey, a gigantic berg, but never knowing from moment
to moment when or where exactly to expect it. This was a splendid
chance for the croakers. Many a great solemn head was shaken, and many
a jaw wagged with gloomy forebodings over that unusual and unexpected
appearance of ice in the Southern Sea. By-and-by, the wind began to
freshen, and signs of another gale appeared, though this time from
a quarter fairly favourable to us; and with her canvas snugged down
and a bright lookout forward, the old ship began to shake her sides
as she hurried away from those inhospitable seas with their spectral
occupants towards the inviting warmth of the tropics and the steady
blast of the trade-winds.

Anxious for a breath of fresh air before turning in to my half-sodden
hammock, I went on deck to take a turn with a chum, and enjoy, as we
often did together, a few anticipations of the delights of home once
more. It was a wild—a very wild night. There was a small moon; but
the clouds were hurrying over her face in ragged streamers, and in
such constant succession, that her light was seldom visible; and when
she did show it for a fleeting moment, it fell upon a black, tossing,
angry sea, whose waves broke into clouds of icy foam as they fell
baffled off the bow of the great ship, or tried to leap savagely over
her quarter. It was a hard steady gale, the wind shrieking and humming
through the rigging, and the old ship herself pounding ponderously but
irresistibly at the great mountains of water before her, and creaking,
groaning, and complaining as she did so, masts, yards, hull, all in one
strident concert together, as if remonstrating at the labour which she
was forced to undergo. In spite of the moon, the night was as black
as Erebus, and from the quarter-deck on which we paced, the bow of
the ship was barely visible. We were just turning our faces aft, my
chum and I, in our quarter-deck walk, when a voice rang out sudden,
clear, and loud forward—the voice of the starboard lookout man: ‘A
bright light on the starboard bow!’ Instantly we, and indeed every
soul on deck, turned and peered hard in that direction. Not a vestige
of a light was to be seen! Then the voice of the officer of the watch
was heard from the bridge, ordering the midshipman of the watch to go
forward and find out if the man was dreaming, or if any one else had
seen the light which he reported. No one else had seen it; but the man
stuck to his text. He had seen for a second of time a bright light on
the starboard bow—a _very_ bright light, quite different from anything
which was usually seen at sea.

‘No, sir! I beg your pardon, sir! I wasn’t asleep—not I, sir! broad
awake as I am now, sir! and able to swear to it.’

By this time all hands were on the alert, and many officers, old and
young, had tumbled up from below at the hail.

‘But, my good man, if it was really a light which you saw, some one
else must have noticed it too.’

‘Don’t know nothin’ about that, sir; but I can swear to it. What I seen
were’——

‘A bright light on the starboard beam!’ sang out the starboard waist
lookout at this moment, and ‘I saw it!’ and ‘I saw it!’ echoed several
voices; but before the officer of the watch could turn round towards
the direction indicated, it was gone, and the starboard beam presented
one uniform sheet of impenetrable blackness.

‘Waist there! What was it like?’

‘Somethin’ of a flash-light, I should say, sir,’ replied the lookout.
‘Very bright and very short—gone in a moment-like.’

By this time the captain and commander were both on the bridge, and the
whole ship was alive with curiosity.

‘What can it be?’ I asked of the old boatswain against whom I brushed
in the darkness as I walked aft.

‘’Tis a boat,’ said he; ‘that’s what it must be. The cap’n he allows
it’s a boat, and he’s pretty sure to be right. Some poor souls whose
vessel has foundered among the ice—whalers, most likely—took to the
boats, they have. I saw that there light myself—seemed very close to
the water, it did. They seen our lights, and burnt a flash-light. If
they got another, they’ll show that, too, presently.’

And now the voice of the commander rang out: ‘Mr Sights!’

‘Ay, ay, sir,’ replied the gunner.

‘Clear away your two foremost guns on the maindeck, and fire blank
charges at short intervals; and get some blue lights, and show them in
the fore-rigging at once!’

‘Ay, ay, sir.’ And away went the gunner to see his orders carried out
instantly.

But ere his head had disappeared down the hatchway—‘A bright light on
the starboard quarter!’ roared out the marine sentry at the lifebuoy
right aft; and once more everybody turned sharp round to find nothing
to gaze at but the universal darkness.

‘Hands, about ship!’ was now the order; and in quick succession came
from the bridge the well-known commands in the sharp, imperative
voice of the lieutenant of the watch: ‘Ease down the helm!’—‘Helm’s
a lee!’—‘Raise tacks and sheets!’ &c. And as the splendid old ship
answered her helm like a boat, and began to fill on the other tack,
‘Maintopsail haul!’—for our courses were furled—‘Head braces!’ ‘Of all,
haul!’ and we were on the other tack.

The ship was now brilliantly illuminated by half-a-dozen blue lights
burnt in her fore and main rigging; while, as we began to move ahead
once more, our bow guns blazed forth from the maindeck one after the
other—a roar which we fondly imagined would be more welcome than the
most delicious music to the ears of the poor storm-tossed castaways
in that frail boat which we now hoped to rescue from the wrath of the
raging sea. At intervals there appeared again the bright but transient
flash which had first attracted our notice; and through the roar of
the waves and the shriek of the wind, we at times imagined that we
could hear human voices shouting no doubt for help, and all eyes were
strained to the uttermost through the blackness to try and discern the
first glimpse of the boat itself. The last flash had told us that we
were steering directly for it, and on we sped, our blue lights hissing
and flaring in our rigging, our guns ceaselessly roaring out our
sympathy and our desire to save.

‘Keep a sharp lookout forward there!’—‘Lifeboat’s crew, fall in aft!’
and we prepared to lower the port quarter-boat, which was told off as
a ‘lifeboat’—that is, for any purposes of rescue, although the state
of the sea was anything but favourable for boat-duty; but when we
thought of that poor boat tossing about on the storm-vexed sea with its
freight of shivering and half-drowned men, ay, and maybe a woman or two
among them, and then remembered the frowning icebergs and the fearful
dangers which they represented, no man hesitated, and had volunteers
been called for to man the lifeboat, the whole ship’s company would
have come forward. Well can I remember the almost choking feeling of
thankfulness in my own heart when I thought of the wild joy of these
poor outcasts at the prospect of so speedy a rescue, and anticipated
the delight of welcoming them on the quarter-deck of so staunch and
safe a ship. But all in a moment my anticipations and my sentiments of
gratitude were scattered to the winds.

‘Keep her away, sir! keep her away!’ came a roar from the forecastle.
‘You’ll be right down upon her! A large full-rigged ship right ahead of
us!’

Up went our helm, and the ship’s head paid off; and as we strained
our eyes in the direction indicated, we could dimly make out, to our
intense surprise and unspeakable wonder, the huge, shadowy, ghostly
outline of an unusually large vessel. No signs of life appeared about
her. The light which had first attracted our notice was now no longer
to be seen. Her masts, yards, and sails were only just visible—not
as a black hard shadow against the sky, but pale, spectral, as if
mere vapour—barely to be discerned, yet leaving no room for doubt.
There she sailed, a veritable phantom ship. All hands gazed at her in
silence. The blue lights were allowed to burn out, and no fresh ones
were lighted. The great guns ceased to thunder on the maindeck. The
lifeboat’s crew muttered uneasily among themselves, as if dreading
the possibility of being ordered to board so uncanny a craft; while
the older hands once more shook their heads, and said ‘they knowed we
’adn’t seen the last of that poor feller as fell overboard.’

But there was nothing more for us to do. Who and what the mysterious
stranger hanging on our port quarter was we could not possibly
ascertain on such a night, in such a gale; and at length the order was
given to ‘Wear ship;’ and we once more turned our back on the vessel
which we had been so eagerly pursuing for more than an hour. As we did
so, we could see that he too altered his course; his spectral yards,
with their shadowy sails, swung round, and he disappeared without a
sign in the darkness of the night.

       *       *       *       *       *

‘Don’t tell me,’ said the boatswain, ‘as that there were a real ship.
Didn’t that poor feller disappear suddently just before we sighted her?
Answer me that! Well, then—did we ever know what become of him, eh?—No!
Very well, then! That there phantom ship was to tell us as how he was
drownded, that’s what that were, and nobody shan’t persuade me no
other than that.—How do I explain them bright lights? Answer me this:
Were them lights ornery lights, such as ship shows at night?—No; of
course they weren’t. Corpse lights!—that’s my answer; and when I says
corpse-lights, I means it.’

It _may_ have been an honest merchantman, outward-bound, and too
intent upon making a speedy voyage to ‘speak’ us, but, nevertheless,
the boatswain’s opinion was pretty generally accepted as the correct
solution of what was considered to be an ocean mystery.

       *       *       *       *       *

Printed and Published by W. & R. CHAMBERS, 47 Paternoster Row, LONDON,
and 339 High Street, EDINBURGH.

       *       *       *       *       *

_All Rights Reserved._

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHAMBERS'S JOURNAL OF POPULAR
LITERATURE, SCIENCE, AND ART, FIFTH SERIES, NO. 123, VOL. III, MAY 8,
1886 ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
